README.md, before:

# minimARM-OS

## Boards
Support for:

- [x] Raspberry Pi Zero W
- [x] Raspberry Pi 4
## Features
- [x] Basic Directory Structure
- [x] Register Addresses
    - [x] GPIO
    - [x] AUX
- [x] mini UART
- [x] Kernel printing info on start up
- [x] `printk`
- [x] `string.h` functions
    - [x] `strlen`, `strcmp`, `strcpy`, `strcat`, `strrev`
    - [x] `memset`, `memcpy`
- [ ] `stdlib.h` functions
    - [x] `itoa`
- [x] `stdbool`
    - [x] `true`, `false`
- [x] Exception Levels (ARMv8-a)
    - [x] `armstub` starts kernel at EL3
    - [x] Kernel starts at EL3
    - [x] Print EL
    - [x] Change from EL3 to EL1
- [x] Interrupts - IRQ
    - [x] Initialize vector table
    - [x] Enable / Disable interrupts
    - [x] IRQ registers
    - [x] Handle mini UART interrupts
    - [x] Handle Timer interrupts
- [x] Timer
    - [x] System Timer 1, 3 handler
    - [x] Sleep (msec)
- [x] GPIO
    - [x] Functions for set/clear pins
    - [x] Function for seting Alt Func to GPIO pins
- [x] LED
    - [x] Functions for turning LED at a GPIO pin on/off
    - [x] Functions for blinking LED at a GPIO pin
    - [x] Functions for sending SOS, from a LED at a GPIO pin
- [ ] Console
    - [x] prompt
    - [x] Take users input
    - [x] Command parser
    - [x] Handle Commands
    - [ ] Help Command
    - [ ] Add functionality to commands

Commit message:

Added help, halt, led_on/off commands, moved LED_PIN define to led.h

README.md, after:

# minimARM-OS

## Boards
Support for:

- [x] Raspberry Pi Zero W
- [x] Raspberry Pi 4
## Features
- [x] Basic Directory Structure
- [x] Register Addresses
    - [x] GPIO
    - [x] AUX
- [x] mini UART
- [x] Kernel printing info on start up
- [x] `printk`
- [x] `string.h` functions
    - [x] `strlen`, `strcmp`, `strcpy`, `strcat`, `strrev`
    - [x] `memset`, `memcpy`
- [ ] `stdlib.h` functions
    - [x] `itoa`
- [x] `stdbool`
    - [x] `true`, `false`
- [x] Exception Levels (ARMv8-a)
    - [x] `armstub` starts kernel at EL3
    - [x] Kernel starts at EL3
    - [x] Print EL
    - [x] Change from EL3 to EL1
- [x] Interrupts - IRQ
    - [x] Initialize vector table
    - [x] Enable / Disable interrupts
    - [x] IRQ registers
    - [x] Handle mini UART interrupts
    - [x] Handle Timer interrupts
- [x] Timer
    - [x] System Timer 1, 3 handler
    - [x] Sleep (msec)
- [x] GPIO
    - [x] Functions for set/clear pins
    - [x] Function for seting Alt Func to GPIO pins
- [x] LED
    - [x] Functions for turning LED at a GPIO pin on/off
    - [x] Functions for blinking LED at a GPIO pin
    - [x] Functions for sending SOS, from a LED at a GPIO pin
- [ ] Console
    - [x] prompt
    - [x] Take users input
    - [x] Command parser
    - [x] Handle Commands
    - [x] Commands
        - [x] help
        - [x] halt
        - [x] led_on
        - [x] led_off
        - [ ] led_on pin
        - [ ] led_off pin
